 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDIA RANKINGS 202 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTIONAL RANKING FRAMEWORK  
 
Methodology for Ranking of Academic Institutions in India  
  
(RANKING METRICS FOR OVERALL)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Education  
1. Salient Features  
 
 
 
1.1 Methodology is based on developing a set of metrics for ranking of academic 
institutions, based on the parameters agreed upon by the core committee.  
 
1.2 These  parameters are organized into five broad heads and have been further 
elaborated into suitable sub -heads. Each broad head has an overall weight 
assigned to it. Within each head, the various sub -heads also have an 
appropriate weight distribution.  
 
1.3 An at tempt is also made to identify the relevant data needed to suitably 
measure the performance score under each sub -head. Emphasis here is on 
identifying data that the institution can easily provide or is easy to obtain from 
third -party  sources and is easily verifiable, where verification is needed. This is 
important in the interest of transparency.  
 
1.4 A suitable metric is then proposed based on this data, which computes a score 
under each sub -head. The sub -head scores are then added to obtain scores for 
each individual head. The overall score is computed based on the weights allotted 
to each head. The overall score can take a maximum value of 100.  
 
1.5 The institutions can then be rank -ordered based on their scores.  
 
 
 
2. Eligibility for Overall and Discipline -Specific  Rankings  
 
2.1 Learning from our experience of the earlier ranking exercises , it is proposed to 
have the following different ways of Ranking.  
 
(i) This year, all candidate institutions, independent of their discipline  or 
nature (comprehensiv e or otherwise) , will be given an overall rank1, if 
they satisfy the criteria that they have a total of at least  1000  student 
intake or enrolled students in UG and PG programs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 The parameters have been chosen in such a manner that they  are equally relevant for 
various kinds of educational institutions. Data format is designed to ensure that the 
diversity of disciplines and their separate character are accounted for. 
 
(ii) Institutions will also be given a discipline -specific  rank as relevant.  
 
(iii) Highly focused  institutions with a single main discipline (Engineering, 
Medical, Law, Management, Pharmacy, Architecture , or UG degree colleges in 
Arts, Science , and Commerce, etc.) w ith less than 1000 total sanctioned 
approved intake or enrolled students will be given only a discipline -specific  
rank.  
(iv) Schools or Departments of Universities or Institutions (such as 
Architecture, Engineering, Law Faculty, Management Departments, Pharmacy , 
etc.) will have to register separately and provide additional data (in the format) 
pertaining to the respective School or Department, if they desire to be included 
in the discipline -specific  ranking list. All institutions should seriously consider 
this o ption if they wish to position their important Faculties/Schools at the 
national level. Only options available on the registration portal will be 
considered for discipline -specific  rankings2. 
 
 
(v) Undergraduate Teaching institutions (including degree colleges  affiliated to 
a university) are also invited to participate.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 If an engineering school of a University consists of a single engineering discipline with very 
few students, they would not be eligible for ranking even under the discipline -specific  
category. Thus, if the engineering faculty of a University has only the Department of 
Electronics Engineering as its Engineering School, it need not apply for a separate discipline -
specific  ranking under the engineering category. 
 
(vi) Discipline -specific  ranks will be announced only in those disciplines where 
a significant number of institutions offer themselves for ranking, and the List 
includes some of the prominent inst itutions in that discipline, with an 
acceptable ranking score. The final decision on the ranking of a discipline will 
therefore be decided by NIRF after analysing the data.  
 
 
(vii) Open Universities and Affiliating Universities (whether State or Centre 
approved/ funded) will not be considered for ranking. However, if these 
universities have a teaching or research campus of their own, they are welcome 
to participate with data pertaining only to their physical campuses. Data 
pertaining to their function as open or a ffiliating universities cannot be 
included in the submitted data.  
 
 
(viii) Rankings will be considered only for those institutions that have graduated 
at least three batches of students in full-time  UG or PG programs, where the 
duration is not less than three years for the UG programs and two years for the 
PG programs.  
 
 
2.2 While score computations for the parameters are similar for both kinds of 
rankings (i.e., overall or discipline -specific ) on m ost counts, the weights are 
somewhat different on a few parameters, to take into account discipline -
specific  issues.  
 
  
 
3. Data Collection  
 
3.1 In view of the absence of a reliable and comprehensive third -party Data -Base 
that could supply all relevant  information (as needed for computing the said 
scores), it is imperative that the institutions that are desirous of participating 
in the ranking exercise, supply the data in the given format that is being made 
available on the NIRF portal, before the last date specified for this purpose. The 
deadlines will be separately announced on the NIRF portal.  
 
 
3.2 It is required that the institutions upload the submitted data also on their own, 
publicly visible website in the interest of transparency. The access to this data 
should be through a prominent link named NIRF on the homepage itself.  It is 
mandatory that institutions should host the data submitted for India Rankings 
2025 on their website post the final submission , and they should also provide 
an email address where they would receive comments and feedback. 
Institutions should proactively  and objectively examine the comments and 
feedback received to effect corrections, if so warranted (within the time slot to 
be announced by NIRF on its website) . All institutions have to mandatorily  host 
data submitted for India Rankings 202 5 for a period of three years.  
 
 
 
 
3.3 Institutions that fail to post the data submitted to NIRF on their own websites (as 
indicated in 3.2), or those that do not have an institution website, will be given 
initial  notice , and afterwards , an appropriate action will be taken.  
 
 
3.4 NIRF has been empowered to take up physical checks on the institution records 
and audited accounts where needed, to ensure that the principles of ethi cal 
behaviour are being adhered to. In case an institution is approached for 
carrying out any physical check, they are expected to cooperate . Non -
cooperation may lead to debarring the institution from participation in the 
ranking exercise.  
 
3.5 For some of  the parameters (like Research, Patents , etc.) , the data will be 
populated from internationally available databases . However, NIRF reserves the 
right not to use the data from any of these sources or include other sources, if so 
warranted. NIRF shall directly access data from these resources or seek help from 
the resource publishers, as necessary.  
 
3.6 NIRF also reserves the right to modify any of the metrics if it deems fit to do so 
in the interest of rationalisation necessitated by the exigencies or the nature of 
the data encountered. Any changes so made will be notified at the time of 
announcing the rankings.  
 
3.7 If any participating institution is found sending promotional/canvassing emails 
during the Ranking Exercise, then all the votes received in the survey will be set 
to zero.
4. Implementation Details  
 
4.1 As in the previous year, the National Board o f Accreditation (NBA) will continue 
to be the Ranking Agency on behalf of NIRF for 202 5. 
 
 
4.2 NIRF shall invite institutions interested in participating  in the ranking exercise 
to register on the NIRF portal. The data should be submitted on an online  
facility created for this purpose.  
 
 
4.3 NIRF, by itself or with the help of other suitably identified partner agencies , will 
also undertake authentication of data, wherever felt necessary, and where 
feasible.  
 
 
4.4 NIRF will extract the relevant information from this data and , through software, 
compute the various metrics and rank institutions based on this data. This 
process is expected to be completed in about 3 months, and rankings will be 
published on the first Monday of April  of the year of ranking . 
 
 
5. Errors and Correction Policy  
 
5.1 All efforts will be made to display the raw data on the NIRF website after due 
processing by NIRF for cross -checking by the institution. This is the data on 
which the rankings would be finally computed. It will be the Ins titution’s 
responsibility to ensure that the data published by NIRF accurately reflects the 
submissions by it. The institution will also be invited to check out the data 
supplied by or taken from third -party  sources. If the Institution does not give 
any co mments or feedback within a specified period on the displayed data, it 
will be assumed that this data is accurate. No petitions for corrections will be  
 
accepted after the declared deadline, or  after the rankings have been 
announced.  
 
 
 
5.2 It is the responsibility of the Nodal officer to ensure that the data updated 
during data verification is correct. And if the data updated is incorrect, the 
Nodal Officer should send an email before the ranki ngs are announced. No such 
complaints will be entertained after the release of ranks.  
 
5.3 If it is found that an institution has deliberately manipulated the submitted 
data, causing erroneous rankings, NIRF will remove the institution from the 
ranking list and future rankings and publish a suitable note to this effect.  
Summary of Ranking Parameters and Weightages - 2025 
(Overall)  
Sr. No.  Parameter  Marks  Weightage  
    
1 Teaching, Learning & Resources  100 0.30 
2 Research and Professional Practice  100 0.30 
3 Graduation Outcomes  100 0.20 
4 Outreach and Inclusivity  100 0.10 
5 Perception  100 0.10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overall  
 
# For State Public Universities, the Faculty Student Ratio (FSR) is considered based on 1:20.  
* For  Universities and State Public Universities,  in the Perception  parameter, 70% weight is 
given to Peer Perception and 30% to Accreditation.  
  S. No. Parameters  Marks  
1. Teaching, Learning &  Resources (TLR)  
Ranking weight: 0.30  100 
 
 A. Student Strength including Doctoral Students  (SS): 20 marks  
B. Faculty -student ratio with emphasis on permanent faculty 
(FSR)#: 25 marks  
C. Combined metric for Faculty with PhD (or equivalent) and 
Experience (FQE): 20  marks  
D. Financial Resources and their Utilisation (FRU):  20 marks  
E. Online Education: Online Completion of Syllabus & Exams and 
Swayam (OE): 1 0 marks  
F. Combined metric for Multiple Entry/Exit, Indian Knowledge 
System , Regional languages , and Sustainable Living Practices  
(MIR S): 5 marks  
  
2. Research and Professional Practice (RP)  
Ranking weight: 0.30  100 
 A. Combined metric for Publications (PU): 3 5 marks  
B. Combined metric for Quality of Publications (QP): 3 5 marks  
C. IPR and Patents: Published and Granted (IPR): 15 marks  
D. Footprint of Projects and Professional Practice (FPPP): 15 marks   
3. Graduation Outcomes (GO)  
Ranking weight: 0.20  100 
 A. Metric for University Examinations(GUE): 60 marks  
B. Metric for Number of Ph.D. Students Graduated (GPHD):  
40 marks   
4. Outreach and Inclusivity (OI)  
Ranking weight: 0.10  100 
 A. Percentage of Students from Other States/Countries (Region 
Diversity RD): 30 marks  
B. Percentage of Women (Women Diversity WD): 30 marks  
C. Economically and Socially Challenged Students (ESCS):  
20 marks  
D.  Facilities for Physically Challenged Students (PCS): 20 marks  
  
5. Perception (PR)*  
Ranking weight: 0.10  100 
 A. Peer Perception:  Academic Peers and Employers (PR): 100 
marks   
 
1. Teaching, Learning & Resources (TLR): 100 marks  
 
• Ranking weight: 0.30  
 
• Overall Assessment Metric:  
 
TLR = SS (20) + FSR (25) + FQE (20) + FRU (20) + OE (1 0) + MIR S (5) 
 
• Component metrics based on:  
 
A. Student Strengths,  including Ph.D. Students: SS   
B. Faculty -Student Ratio with emphasis on permanent faculty: FSR   
C. Combined metric for Faculty with PhD (or equivalent) and Experience:  FQE   
D. Financial Resources and Their Utilisation: FRU  
E. Online Education: Online Completion of Syllabus & Exams and Swayam: OE  
F. Combined metric for Multiple Entry/Exit, Indian Knowledge System , Regional 
languages , and Sustainable Living Practices : MIR S 
 
  
A. Student Strength , including Ph.D. students (SS): 20 Marks  
 
• SS = f(N T, NE) × 15 + f(N P) × 5  
 
• The functions f(N T ,NE) and f(N p) are functions to be determined by NIRF.  
• NT: Total sanctioned approved intake in the institution , considering all UG and PG 
programs of the institution.  
• NE: Total number of students enrolled in the institution , considering all UG and PG 
programs of the institution.  
• Np = Total number of students enrolled for the doctoral program till the previous 
academic year.  
 
• Primary Data: To be provided in a prescribed Format . 
 
  
B. Faculty -Student Ratio with emphasis on permanent faculty (FSR): 25 marks  
 
• FSR = 25 × [15 × (F/N)]  
 
• N =N T+ N p 
• F: Full-time regular faculty in the institution in the previous year.  
• Regular appointment means Faculty on a full -time basis. Faculty on a contract basis/ad -
hoc basis  means Faculty which have taught in both semesters.  
• Faculty  will be considered if the concerned faculty has taught in both semesters of the 
academic year 2023 -24. 
• Faculty members with Ph.D. and Master's  degrees  will be considered and counted here. 
Faculty members  with a Bachelor’s degree will not be counted.  
 
• Expected ratio is 1:15 to score maximum marks.  
 
• For F/N < 1:50, FSR will be set to zero . 
 
 
 
 
• Primary Data: Faculty List to be provided in the Prescribed Format.  
 
C. Combined Metric for Faculty with PhD (or equivalent) and Experience (FQE): 20 marks  
 
• FQ = 10 × (F RA/95), F RA < 95%;  
• FQ = 10, F RA ≥ 95%.  
 
• Here , FRA is the percentage of Faculty with Ph.D. (or equivalent qualification) with respect 
to the total no. of faculty required or actual faculty , whichever is higher, in the previous 
year.  
. F1=Fraction with Experience up to 8 years;  
 
F2= Fraction with Experience between 8+ to 15years;  
 F3=Fraction with Experience > 15 years.  
 
 
FE = 3  min (3F1, 1) + 3 min  (3F2, 1) + 4 min  (3F3, 1) 
Rationale: Full marks for a ratio of 1:1:1  
 
 
• FQE = FQ + FE  
 
 
 
 
• Primary Data: Faculty List in the Prescribed Format.  
D: Financial Resources and their Utilisation (FRU): 20 Marks  
 
• FRU = 5×f(BC) + 15×f(BO)  
 
• BC: Average Annual Capital Expenditure per student for the previous three years. 
(Excluding expenditure on construction of new  buildings ) 
 
• BO: Average Annual Operational (or Recurring) Expenditure per student for 
the previous three years. (Excluding maintenance of hostels and allied 
services)  
 
 
 
• Primary Data: Figures in the prescribed format for each.  
 
E: Online Education: Online Completion of Syllabus & Exams and Swayam (OE): 1 0 
marks   
 
• OE = f(OE)  
  
F: Combined metric for Multiple Entry/Exit, Indian Knowledge System , Regional 
languages , and Sustainable Living Practices  (MIR S): 5 marks  
 
• MIR =  5 ×(MEE +  IKS + RL  +  SLP ) 
 
• MEE = Implementation of Multiple Entry/Exit  
• IKS = Introduction of courses of the Indian Knowledge System  
• RL = Courses being offered in Regional Languages  
• SLP: Sustainable Living Practices  
  
 
2. Research and Professional  Practice (RP): 100 marks  
 
• Ranking weight: 0.30  
 
• Overall Assessment Metric:  
 
RP = PU  (35) + QP  (35) + IPR  (15) + FPPP  (15)  
 
• The component metrics are explained on the following pages.  
 
 
A. Combined Metric for Publications: PU   
B. Combined Metric for Quality of Publications: QP   
C. IPR and Patents: Published and Granted: IPR   
D. Footprint of Projects, Professional Practice and Executive Development 
Programs: FPPP  
  
A. Combined metric for Publications (PU): 3 5 marks  
 
• PU = 3 5 × f(P/F RQ)- 7.5 × f(P ret) 
 
• P is the weighted number of publications as ascertained  from suitable third -party  
sources.  
• Pret is the number of retracted publications.  
• FRQ is the maximum of the nominal number of faculty members as calculated based 
on a required FSR of 1:15 or the available faculty in the institution.  
• Sources: Third -party  sources.  
 
B. Combined metric for Quality of Publications (QP): 3 5 Marks  
 
 
• QP = {20 × f (CC/ FRQ) + 1 5× f (TOP25P/P) }-7.5 × f(C ret) 
 
• Here , CC is the Total Citation Count over the previous three years.  
• P is as computed for PU.  
• TOP25P: Number of citations in the top 25 percentile averaged over the previous 
three years.  
• Cret is the Total retracted citations count over the previous three years.  
• FRQ is the maximum of the nominal number of faculty members as calculated based 
on a required FSR of 1:15 or the available faculty in the institution.  
 
• Primary Data: Third Party Sources.  
C. IPR and Patents: Patents Published & Granted (IPR): 15 marks  
 
IPR = IPG + IPP  
IPG = 10× f (PG)  
• PG is the number of patents granted over the previous three years.  
IPP = 5 × f (PP)  
• PP: No. of patents published over the previous three years.  
• Primary Data: Third Party Sources  
 
  
D. Footprint of Projects, Professional Practice and Executive Development Programs 
/Management Development Programs (FPPP): 15 marks  
 
• FPPP = FPR + FPC + EDP/MDP  
 
• FPR = 5 × f(RF)  
 
• RF is the average annual research funding earnings (amount received in rupees)  at 
the institute level in the previous three years.  
 
• FPC =5 × f(CF)  
 
• CF is the average annual consultancy amount (amount actually received in rupees) 
at the institute level in the previous three years.  
 
• EDP/MDP = 5 × f(EP)  
 
• EP = Average annual earnings from Executive Development Programs/Management 
Development Programs in the previous three years.  
 
• Primary Data: To be provided by the institution in the prescribed format.  
  
3. Graduation Outcome (GO):100 marks  
 
• Ranking weight: 0.20  
 
• Overall Assessment Metric:  
 
• GO = GUE  (60) +GPHD  (40) 
 
• The component metrics are explained on the following pages:   
A. Metric for University Examinations: GUE   
B. Metric for Number of Ph.D. Students Graduated: GPHD  
 
A. Metric for University Examinations (GUE): 60 Marks  
 
• GUE = 60 × min [(Ng/80), 1]  
 
 
 
• Ng is the percentage of Students (as a fraction of the approved intake), averaged 
over the previous three years, passing the respective university examinations in 
the stipulated time for the program in which they are enrolled.  
 
• Primary Data: To be provided in a prescribed format
B. Metric for Number of Ph.D Students Graduated (GPHD): 40 Marks  
 
• GPHD = 40 × f(Nphd)  
 
 
 
• Nphd = Average number of Ph.D students graduated (aw arded Ph.D) over the 
previous three years.  
 
 
 
• Primary Data: Number of graduating Ph.D. Students , as reflected in the 
approved Annual Report/Convocation Report , are to be provided in the 
prescribed format.  
4. Outreach and Inclusivity (OI): 100 marks  
 
• Ranking weight: 0.10  
 
• Overall Assessment Metric: OI = RD  (30) + WD  (30) +ESCS  (20) + PCS  (20) 
 
• The component metrics are explained on the following  pages:  
A. Percentage of Students from Other States/ Countries (Region Diversity): RD   
B. Percentage of Women (Women Diversity): WD   
C. Economically and Socially Challenged Students: ESCS   
D. Facilities for Physically Challenged Students: PCS  
A. Percentage of Students from Other States/ Countries (Region Diversity RD): 30 marks  
 
RD = 25 × fraction of total students enrolled from other states + 5 × fraction of 
students enrolled from other countries  
 
 
 
Primary Data: To be provided in the prescribed format.  
B. Percentage of Women (Women Diversity WD): 30 marks  
 
• WD = 15 × (N WS/50) + 15 × (NWF/20)  
 
•  NWS is the percentage of Women students.  
• NWF is the percentage of Women Faculty , including women members in senior 
administrative positions, such as Heads of Departments, Deans , or Institute Heads.  
• Expectation: 50% women students and 20% women  faculty.  
• Primary Data: To be provided in the prescribed format.  
 
C. Economically and Socially Challenged Students (ESCS): 20 marks  
 
 
• ESCS = 20 × f(N esc)  
• Nesc is the percentage of students being provided full tuition fee reimbursement  by the 
institution to pursue their degree programs.  
• Primary Data: To be provided by the institution in a prescribed format.  
  
D. Facilities for Physically Challenged Students  (PCS): 20 marks  
 
• PCS = 20 marks, if the Institute provides full facilities for physically 
challenged students, as outlined.  
 
Else, in proportion to facilities.  
 
 
• Basis: Verifiable Responses to Questions.  
 
 
• Primary Data: To be provided in a prescribed format . 
  
5. Perception (PR) – 100 marks  
 
• Ranking weight: 0.1  
• Overall Assessment Metric: PR = PR(100)  
• Component metrics are explained in the following pages:  
A. Peer Perception: Employers & Academic Peer: (PR)  
 
  
A. Peer Perception: Employers & Academic Peer (PR): 100 marks  
 
• This is to be done through a survey conducted over a large category of Employers, 
Professionals from Reputed Organizations , and a large category of academics to 
ascertain their preference for graduates of different institutions.  
• A comprehensive  list will be prepared , taking into account various sectors, regions, 
etc. 
• Lists to be updated periodically.  
 
